 
 
John C. BERRIGAN 
 
Nationality: 
 
 
Irish 
 
Academic 
qualifications: 
 1985 - M.A. (Economics) awarded October - University College Dublin, Republic of Ireland 
 1983 - B.A. (Economics) awarded October - University College Dublin, Republic of Ireland 
Professional 
experience in the 
European 
Institutions: 
 Since 04/03/2020: Director-General – DG Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital 
Markets Union (FISMA) 
 
 16/12/2015 - 03/03/2020:  Deputy Director-General in charge of Directorates B, C, D and E  in 
DG FISMA 
 
 11/2014 – 12/2015: Director for Financial System Surveillance and Crisis Management in DG 
FISMA: Part of the Directorate was transferred from DG ECFIN and remains responsible for 
analysis of financial -sector developments at global, EU and Member -State level (includ ing 
participation in the external financial assistance programmes for Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Spain 
and Cyprus). Other areas of responsibility include (a) managing the EU framework for macro -
prudential policy, including participation in the European Sys temic Risk Board; (b) 
establishing/management of EU framework for crisis management in the financial sector, notably 
through arrangements for recovery and resolution; and (c) participation in the Single Resolution 
Board in support of the Commission’s role as joint resolution authority within the Banking Union. 
 
 05/2010 – 10/2014: Director for Financial Stability and Monetary Affairs in DG ECFIN: 
Directorate was created in response to the economic and financial crisis of 2008/2009 and was 
responsible for ana lysis of financial -sector developments at global, EU and Member -State level 
(including participation in the external financial assistance programmes for EL, IE, PT, ES and 
CY). Other areas of responsibility were (a) analysis of developments in the EU banki ng sector, 
specifically in co -operation with DG COMP in applying state -aid policies; (b) development of EU -
level sovereign instruments (i.e. the EFSF, the EFSM and the ESM; and (c) monitoring 
developments in monetary policy in the euro area and the Member States, supporting the 
Commissioner in the ECB Governing Council. 
 
 05/2000 – 04/2010: Head of Unit for Financial Markets and Financial Intermediaries in DG 
ECFIN.  Unit was responsible for monitoring developments in EU financial markets, notably for 
fixed-income securities, equities and derivatives. Other areas of responsibility included monitoring 
progress in the integration of euro -denominated financial markets, progress in completing the 
Internal Market for financial services, developments in the EU vent ure capital markets, and issues 
related to prudential supervision. The Unit also provided technical/secretarial support to the 
Giovannini Group, producing two reports on EU clearing and settlement arrangements and the 
EFC Sub-Group on EU Government Bonds and Bills Markets. 
 
 01/1996 – 04/2000: Principal administrator/administrator in DG ECFIN