 
 
 
Martin SEYCHELL 
 
 
 
Nationality: 
 
Maltese 
Academic qualifications:  Bachelor of Pharmaceutical Technology (Honours) from the University of Malta – Second 
Class Lower Honours degree. Subjects covered: Chemistry, Biology, Industrial Chemistry, 
Pharmaceutics, Management. Four years full time course. 
Professional experience 
in the European 
Institutions: 
 Since 16 January 2021: Deputy Director-General responsible for Directorates G and R in 
DG “International Partnerships” previously named "International Cooperation and 
Development Communication (DEVCO) 
 July 2020 – January 2021: Deputy Director-General – International Cooperation and 
Development (DEVCO) 
 March 2011 - to June 2020: Deputy Director-General in the Health and Food Safety's 
Directorate-General (SANTE). Responsible for directorates dealing with Consumer 
affairs, Public health and Health systems and products. 
To note: DG Health and Consumers (SANCO) became DG Health and Food Safety 
(SANTE) on 1 January 2015. 
Professional experience 
before joining the 
European Institutions: 
 October 2006 - February 2011: Director Environment Protection, Malta Environment & 
Planning Authority.  Responsible for implementation of environmental legislation in Malta 
under the Envi ronment Protection Act, including input into national environmental policy 
and integration of environmental considerations into other policies; Responsible for 
implementation of legislation on environmental permitting, environmental assessment, 
biodiversity (including GMOs), environmental risk (chemicals, noise, air quality, radiation), 
waste management, water and marine policy. Between 2006 and 2009  also responsible 
for implementation of legislation on climate change. 
 
Maltese member on the Management Board of the European Environment Agency (EEA). 
Represented EEA Management Board in shortlisting process for EEA Scientific 
Committees and review of EEA Topic Centres.  
 
Responsible for coordinating technical and legal advice to the Office of the Prime Ministe r 
(OPM) in the formulation and development of the Maltese national position on EC 
legislative proposals directly or indirectly related to the environment. Responsible for 
participation in various Council Working Parties (Environment), comitology meeting s and 
other technical meetings; Responsible for coordinating Maltese position under various 
multilateral agreements in the area of environment.  Co-ordination of and ensuring 
consultation with stakeholders on all aspects related to EC policies and proposals, a s well 
as implementation aspects. 
 
Responsible for liaison with line Ministries so as to ensure effective synergy between 
environmental and all other relevant polices.  Advising the Ministry responsible for the 
environment (currently the Office of the Prime  Minister) prior to and during high level 
meetings at European level, including the Environment Council. Regularly attending 
Environment Council meetings as part of the Ministerial delegation.  
 January 2001 – October 2006 : Head of the Foodstuffs, Chemical s & Cosmetics 
Directorate, Malta Standards Authority, Ministry for Competitiveness & Communications . 
Responsible for implementation of EU chemical and cosmetics safety legislation in Mal ta 
under the Product Safety Act; Responsible for adoption and implemen tation of EU 
legislation in the areas of food labe lling, additives, GMOs & novel foods, geographical 
indications; Responsible for coordinating technical and legal advice to the Ministry for 
Competitiveness & Communications (MCMP) in the formulation and dev elopment of the 
Maltese national position on EC legislative proposals in the areas of food safety, 
chemicals and cosmetic products (Free Movement of Goods).  
 November 1997 - January 2001: Technical Co-ordinator, Malta Standards Authority 
 February 1986  - November 1997 : Professional Officer, Malta Standards Laboratory, 
Department of Industry 
Other professional 
activities: 
 Represented Malta on the 'Sherpa' group set up by the President of the European 
Commission to advise on GMO policy (2008).  
 Represented Malta in meetings of the ad hoc Council Working Party on REACH between 
2004 and 2006.  
 Represented Malta in meetings of the Council Working Party (Environment) dealing with 
proposals on mercury and soil. 
 Between 2002 and 2004 formed part of the CEEC Task F orce, set up by the European 
Association of Cosmetics Manufacturers (COLIPA) to assist accession countries in the 
implementation of the Cosmetic Products Directive. 
Language Skills:  Maltese, English (mother tongue) 
 Italian, French 
 