Swedish politician and Pirate Party MEP (born 1987) 
 This article is about a person whose name includes a patronymic . The article properly refers to the person by her given name, Amelia, and not as Andersdotter. 
 This article needs to be updated . Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information. ( November 2019 ) 
 
 

 Part of a series on Pirate Parties 
 Ideas 
 Anti-corporate activism 
 Anti-corruption 
 Civil and political rights 
 Civil libertarianism 
 Copyright reform 
 Cyber-utopianism 
 Decentralized decision-making 
 Digital rights 
 Direct democracy 
 E-democracy 
 File sharing 
 Free content 
 Free software movement 
 Freedom of information 
 Freedom of speech 
 Hacker culture 
 Hacktivism 
 Information privacy 
 Internet freedom 
 Net neutrality 
 Liquid democracy 
 Open access 
 Open data 
 Open government 
 Open-source hardware 
 Open-source software 
 Participatory democracy 
 Right to privacy 
 
 Parties 
 Australia 
 Austria 
 Belarus 
 Belgium 
 Brazil 
 Canada 
 Croatia 
 Czech Republic 
 Finland 
 France 
 Germany 
 Greece 
 Iceland 
 Israel 
 Italy 
 Luxembourg 
 Netherlands 
 New Zealand 
 Norway 
 Poland 
 Romania 
 Russia 
 Serbia 
 Slovakia 
 Slovenia 
 Spain 
 Sweden 
 Switzerland 
 Tunisia
 Pirate Party 
 Tunisian Pirate Party 
 Turkey 
 Ukraine 
 United Kingdom 
 United States 
 Youth wings 
 Czechia 
 Europe 
 Germany 
 Sweden 
 Subnational 
 Berlin 
 Catalonia 
 Galicia 
 Massachusetts 
 Multi-national 
 Pirate Party of the European Union 
 Pirate Parties International 
 
 People 
 Allioui 
 Amamou 
 Andersdotter 
 Ayala 
 Bartoš 
 Beer 
 Breyer 
 Clement 
 Engels 
 Engström 
 Falkvinge 
 Flod 
 Freigang 
 Gregorová 
 Haase 
 Hillbrecht 
 Hufsky 
 Jónsdóttir 
 Kaye 
 Kolaja 
 Van de Leest 
 Leng 
 McCarthy 
 Nerz 
 Norton 
 Peksa 
 Poot 
 Reda 
 Rusche 
 Seipenbusch 
 Simonet 
 Troberg 
 Voronina 
 
 Related topics 
 Copyleft 
 Copyright abolition 
 Crypto-anarchy 
 Copyright alternatives 
 Criticism of copyright 
 Criticism of patents 
 Free and open-source software 
 Free-culture movement 
 Information society 
 Information wants to be free 
 Internet censorship 
 Online participation 
 Philosophy of copyright 
 Piracy 
 Progressivism 
 Public domain 
 Royalty-free 
 
 Internet&#32;portal 
 Politics&#32;portal v t e 
 Amelia Anna Matilda Katarina Andersdotter (born 30 August 1987) is a Swedish politician and former Member of the European Parliament (2011–2014), elected on the Pirate Party list in the 2009 election .
 
 
 Political career [ edit ] 
 Amelia Andersdotter in 2014 
 Amelia joined the Piratpartiet shortly after its formation in 2006. From June 2007 to March 2010 she was the international coordinator of Ung Pirat , the party's youth wing. In this capacity she coordinated contacts with other groups in Sweden, other pirate political movements around the world, and the organization's international policy viewpoints.
 In 2009, she was named the second candidate on Piratpartiet's list for the European Parliament elections in June of that year. While Piratpartiet did not gain enough votes for a second MEP under the treaty of Nice , they did get enough votes to award her a seat under the terms of the new treaty of Lisbon that was to come into effect December that year. Difficulties with the ratification process of the treaty of Lisbon meant that the seat would not be granted until December 2011. &#91; 1 &#93; From 2011 to 2014, she was the youngest member of the European Parliament. &#91; 2 &#93; 
 In the interim period between her election and her inauguration, she spent much time travelling to different parts of the world talking about her experiences as a young politician and as an advocate of new ideas in information policy. Amongst others the Ars Electronica festival in Linz , Austria &#91; 3 &#93; and a visit to South Korea &#91; 4 &#93; in 2010, which later inspired her political involvement on the Korean peninsula delegation in the European Parliament. She also travelled extensively inside Europe during this time, involving herself in the work of Pirate Parties around Europe.
 During her term in office, she focused her efforts around information policy. She was a part of the Committee on Industry, Research and Energy . She was also a substitute member of the Committee on International Trade and the Committee on Budgetary Control . She also served as a full member of the parliamentary delegation to the Korean peninsula , and a substitute member of the delegation for the Andean community . &#91; 5 &#93; 
 A longtime critic of the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement , her advice to reject it was carried by the ITRE committee, the first of parliamentary committees to propose a rejection of the agreement. Other committees soon followed in the rejection. &#91; 6 &#93; The agreement was soundly rejected by the European Parliament. &#91; 7 &#93; 
 Other areas she worked on include a proposal for a recast of the Union's Re-use of Public Sector Information Directive where she publicly criticized the Swedish government for resisting the proposed changes in access and cost regimes. &#91; 8 &#93; She is also a supporter of public investments in fibre-to-the-home infrastructures. &#91; 9 &#93; 
 
 Awards [ edit ] 
 Top Ten Internet Activists of 2012, The Daily Dot &#91; 10 &#93; 
 Post-parliamentary work [ edit ] 
 After working in the European Parliament, Amelia was a guest researcher at Centre for Internet and Society (India) and technical standards researcher at Article19 and ANEC (organisation) . She made large contributions to the IEEE 802E Privacy Recommendations standard as well as the ISO PC 3117 committee work on privacy and security for home internet-of-things appliances. In later years, she has continued technical standards work to promote power saving features and sustainable hardware on behalf of the operator and device manufacturer communities.
 
 Personal life [ edit ] 
 Amelia Andersdotter was born on 30 August 1987 in Uppsala , Sweden, the first of three children. Her mother, Lotta Lille, is a journalist, and her father, Anders Lundquist, is a teacher and chess tutor. Her sisters are Ulrika and Karolina. She also has a half-brother on her father's side, Eirik Lundquist. After graduating at Rosendalsgymnasiet in Uppsala, she attended university in Lund, where she studied mathematics , physics , Spanish and business law . However, Amelia was elected before completing her studies. &#91; 11 &#93; 
 She has lived in many parts of Europe and India, including Lund , Uppsala , Bucharest , Ghent , Bangalore and Brussels .
 
 See also [ edit ] 
 Pirate Party 
 File sharing 
 Christian Engström 
 Anna Troberg 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 ^ "18 new MEPs to arrive next month" . EUobserver . 14 November 2011 . Retrieved 24 November 2011 . 
 
 ^ 
 Ernesto (20 November 2011). "Pirate To Join European Parliament As Youngest Member" . TorrentFreak . Retrieved 20 November 2011 . 
 
 ^ "Amelia Andersdotter: "Repair" democracy" . 17 September 2010 . Retrieved 16 July 2012 . 
 
 ^ "Illegal downloads? Refuse to accept copyright" . gimsiyeon (in Korean). 18 October 2010. Archived from the original on 6 December 2013 . Retrieved 16 July 2012 . 
 
 ^ "Amelia ANDERSDOTTER" . European Parliament . 1 December 2011 . Retrieved 16 July 2012 . 
 
 ^ "Acta: Piracy treaty dealt critical blows in EU votes" . BBC News . 31 May 2012 . Retrieved 30 November 2012 . 
 
 ^ "European Parliament rejects ACTA" . European Parliament . 4 July 2012 . Retrieved 16 July 2012 . 
 
 ^ Andersdotter, Amelia (5 June 2012). "Sverige blockerar utvecklingen inom öppen data?" (in Swedish). DIK . Retrieved 16 July 2012 . {{ cite web }} : CS1 maint: deprecated archival service ( link ) 
 
 ^ Bencze, Julien (13 June 2012). "Ambition required: pushing for faster internet" . Archived from the original on 12 January 2018 . Retrieved 16 July 2012 . 
 
 ^ Collier, Kevin (28 December 2012). "The top 10 most influential Internet rights activists in 2012" . Society . The Daily Dot . Retrieved 3 January 2013 . 
 
 ^ Ström, Viktor (1 June 2009). "Amelia 2.0" . Lundagård (in Swedish). 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Amelia Andersdotter . 
 
 Official website 
 Official webpage at European Parliament 
 Stenskott (in Swedish) , a public policy blog Amelia contributed to until January 2012. 
 v t e Pirate parties International 
 Pirate Parties International 
 European Pirate Party 
 Parties Africa 
 Tunisia
 Pirate Party 
 Tunisian Pirate Party 
 Americas 
 Brazil 
 Canada 
 United States 
 Massachusetts 
 Asia 
 Israel 
 Europe 
 Austria 
 Belarus 
 Belgium 
 Croatia 
 Czech Republic 
 Finland 
 France 
 Germany 
 Berlin 
 Greece 
 Iceland 
 Italy 
 Luxembourg 
 The Netherlands 
 Norway 
 Poland 
 Romania 
 Russia 
 Serbia 
 Slovenia 
 Slovakia 
 Spain 
 Catalonia 
 Galicia 
 Sweden 
 Switzerland 
 Turkey 
 Ukraine 
 United Kingdom 
 Oceania 
 Australia 
 New Zealand 
 People 
 Samir Allioui 
 Slim Amamou 
 Amelia Andersdotter 
 Carlos Ayala 
 Ivan Bartoš 
 Angelika Beer 
 Patrick Breyer 
 Sven Clement 
 Grégory Engels 
 Christian Engström 
 Rick Falkvinge 
 Stefan Flod 
 Jasmin Freigang 
 Markéta Gregorová 
 Martin Haase 
 Dirk Hillbrecht 
 Florian Hufsky 
 Birgitta Jónsdóttir 
 Laurence "Loz" Kaye 
 Marcel Kolaja 
 Bailey Lamon 
 Ancilla van de Leest 
 Christof Leng 
 Jan Lipavský 
 Smári McCarthy 
 Sebastian Nerz 
 Andrew Norton 
 Mikuláš Peksa 
 Dirk Poot 
 Felix Reda 
 Herbert Rusche 
 Jens Seipenbusch 
 Denis Simonet 
 Anna Troberg 
 Lola Voronina 
 Youth wings 
 Czechia 
 Europe 
 Germany 
 Sweden 
 
 Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National United States People MEP directory