Bulgarian politician (born 1967) 
 This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page . ( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) 
 
 A major contributor to this article appears to have a close connection with its subject. It may require cleanup to comply with Wikipedia's content policies, particularly neutral point of view . Please discuss further on the talk page . See our advice if the article is about you and read our scam warning in case someone asks for money to edit this article. ( July 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) 
 This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification . Please help by adding reliable sources . Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .
 Find sources: &#160; "Andrey Kovatchev" &#160;–&#160; news &#160; · newspapers &#160; · books &#160; · scholar &#160; · JSTOR ( July 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) 
 This article may need to be rewritten to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards . Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . You can help . The talk page may contain suggestions. ( July 2024 ) 
 
 ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) 
 
 

 Andrey Andreev Kovatchev ( Bulgarian : Андрей Андреев Ковачев ; &#91; 1 &#93; born 13 December 1967), is a Bulgarian politician, Member of the European Parliament , a federalist and Head of the Bulgarian Delegation in the EPP Group in the European Parliament . Kovatchev is a chairman of the Union of European Federalists in Bulgaria. Since 2011 he has also been its vice-president. In January 2012 he was elected vice-chair of AFET – Committee on Foreign Affairs of the European Parliament.
 
 
 Early life and education [ edit ] 
 Andrey Kovatchev was born in Sofia . &#91; 2 &#93; 
 He has a degree in Biology form Saarland University , Germany (1990–1995). Later he obtained a PhD in biology from the same university.
 
 Work experience [ edit ] 
 In the period 1995–1998, Kovatchev was a university assistant in Saarland University, Germany. Later he did a traineeship at the European Parliament. In 1998 he became a Commercial Director at Alfa Laval Agri and in 2002 he became a Commercial Manager for John Deere . Between 2004 and 2009 Andrey Kovatchev was a Regional Director for Central and East Europe for Elsevier .
 
 Political career [ edit ] 
 From 2007 Andrey Kovatchev is a Vice- chairman of the Committee on Foreign Policy and European Affairs and Vice – International Secretary of political party GERB .
Andrey Kovatchev became a Member of the European Parliament after the elections in 2009 form the ticket of PP GERB.
Between March 2011 and November 2018 Andrey Kovatchev was vice-president of the Union of European Federalists . Furthermore, he is a Chairman of the Union of the European Federalists in Bulgaria. 
Since January 2012 he is vice-chairman of AFET - Committee on Foreign Affairs of the European Parliament.
 2014 - till now
 Member of European Parliament Presidency (Quaestor),
 member of the Committee on Foreign Policy and European Affairs and
 member of the Subcommittee on Security and Defence and the Delegation for
 Relations with the United States. Substitute of the Committee on the
 Environment, Public Health and Food Safety. Substitute of
 Parliamentary Committee EU-FYROM
 2009–2014 Member of the European Parliament, Head of the Bulgarian Delegation in the EPP Group in the European Parliament, member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Subcommittee on Security and Defence, deputy member the Committee on Regional Development
 Member of the Delegation for Relations with the United States and substitute in the Delegation for relations with the countries of Southeast Asia and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
 President of the Union of European Federalists in Bulgaria and vice-president of UEF from March 2010.
 In 2012, Kovatchev was elected for vice-chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the European Parliament.
 
 Activities and positions in the European Parliament [ edit ] 
 Kovatchev is a Member and a vice-chair of the European Parliament Committee on Foreign Affairs ; he is a member of the Subcommittee on Security and Defence and the Delegation of the European Union to the United States ; He is a Substitute of the Committee on Regional Development and in the Delegation for Relations with the countries of Southeast Asia and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations ( ASEAN ).
 
 Communism and Transition [ edit ] 
 On 17 November 2010, Kovatchev organized a Conference in the European Parliament on The endured European Dream of Bulgaria 1944–1989 . Senior leaders of the European Parliament and the EPP Group took part in the event, including the President of the European Parliament Mr. Jerzy Buzek , the President of the EPP Group Mr. Joseph Daul and the former President of the EP and chairman of the Board of Directors of the ’’ Konrad Adenauer ’’ Foundation Dr. Hans – Gert Poettering .
A number of political prisoners from the communist era attended the conference. Among the participants were Bulgarians of Turkish origin persecuted during the so-called "Revival process" (a repressive campaign of the Bulgarian Communist Party in the 1980s which culminated in a mass exodus of reportedly more than 100,000 Bulgarian Turks), &#91; 3 &#93; as well as many other citizens whose personal paths are connected with the communist repressive machine - the "State Security".
 The event had enjoyed a great interest among the academic community, journalists, organization of people persecuted during the communist regime and citizens interested in the history of totalitarianism in Eastern Europe .
 According to the President of the European Parliament, Jerzy Buzek who opened the conference: The Bulgarian opposition was important because it preserved European values - democracy, the right of ownership, the ideas of freedom of thought and expression – which are the basis of the European Union .
 From 2011, Kovatchev supports a website that brings to light the repressive methods of the communist regime in Bulgaria (1944–1989). This website- edited by Hristo Hristov – a journalist and participant in the conference - grew into the richest source of information on the former communist secret police in Bulgaria, the Bulgarian Communist party, as well as on documents concerning the influence of the communist secret police on the Bulgarian economic life after 1989 and the transition to democracy and market economy .
 
 Reform in Bulgaria's Diplomatic Service [ edit ] 
 Kovatchev is a Member of the Working Group in the EP for Reconciliation of European Histories. He is the supporter of opening the communist archives of all former communist countries. In particular he supported the 2011 reform in the Bulgarian diplomatic service and legal changes made in 2011 by the Bulgarian Government seeking to limit the influence of the former State Security agents in the Bulgarian State and diplomacy.
 According to Kovatchev ’’The law is not a whim of the Minister of Foreign Affairs as his opponents present it, this is continuation of a battle, as old as the Bulgarian transition. The new legislation limits the influence of communist secret services collaborators on Bulgaria's diplomacy. This battle is part of the struggle for transitional justice of the Bulgarian society.
 
 European Integration of the Western Balkans [ edit ] 
 In his role as a Member of the European Parliament, Kovatchev pays significant attention to the Western Balkans and their European perspective. He considers that the integration of Western Balkans is the only way to peace and prosperity in this region, Kovatchev has stated many times his support to the reformist governments with a European orientation.
Kovatchev is an author of important amendments in EP the resolution on the 2010 Progress report on North Macedonia . For the first time the Resolution "underlines the importance of the preservation and maintenance of the cultural heritage, which is a pillar of European values and principles" Furthermore, the European Parliament "notes with regrets that numerous cemeteries, fresco inscriptions and artefacts, which belong to the Bulgarian cultural heritage, have been totally abandoned and ruined". &#91; 4 &#93; 
 Kovatchev has expressed on numerous occasions his concern about ’’the discrimination in North Macedonia, especially for the citizens who candid announced their Bulgarian self-consciousness. Unfortunately, in many cases these people have been abused and they have been victims of arbitrary judgments, denial of work rights, politically motivated arrests and imprisonment".
 In Kovatchev's point of view it is very important for the integration of Macedonia in Europe that people are familiar with the objective history of their own country. A necessary step in this process is making public the archives of the communist secret services of former Yugoslavia , as well as unveiling the names of those connected with the secret police. Kovatchev repeatedly reminds the Macedonian politicians the difficult steps of Bulgaria on its way to United Europe, last but not least because of the influence of the former secret services in the economic and political life of the country.
 His advice to Serbia is similar; he repeatedly sent a request to the authorities and representatives to review the archives of the Yugoslav communist secret services (the Department of State Security ) and to submit them to the other former Yugoslav States.
 Kovatchev is a supporter of the visa-free regime between the EU and all Western Balkan countries. He staunchly opposes to the tendency to restore the visa regime with some of them, because ’’the experience shows that visas hinders the citizens to become well acquainted with United Europe .’’
 
 Economic Governance in the EU [ edit ] 
 Kovatchev is among the supporters of common economic governance in the EU. He asserts that the single currency should be supported by economic and fiscal policies and coordination at supranational level. His views in this respect are federalist , namely, that the EU member states should overcome the intergovernmental instinct in the economic area and move quicker towards creation of supranational mechanisms in the field of economic policy. His opinion for the single currency and its economic base is that it won't be stable when the countries do not work together on issues of economic and budgetary nature.
 
 Position on constitutional affairs of the EU [ edit ] 
 Kovatchev is supportive of the pan-European lists for European Parliament elections. According to the measure, proposed by British liberal MEP Andrew Duff , a small part of the MEPs are elected with a trans-national European list, thus forming an EU constituency. According to Kovatchev, the initiative is an unambiguous sign that the federal project is the only way toward for Europe. Despite the divisions in almost all parliamentary groups and the strong opposition from leading MEPs in the EPP, the Bulgarian MEP asserts that the rejection of this proposal by the new reinvigorated European Parliament would be surrender to national populism. For him and many other federalist, pan-European lists expand the political space from the regional and national to the supranational. Such European representation would strengthen the legitimacy of the European political parties.
 As a next step for strengthening the democratic legitimacy of EU institutions, Kovatchev proposes to merge the position of President of the European Council and the European Commission in one President of the European Union who could be elected by the European citizens directly.
 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^ България, Булевард (7 May 2024). "Вижте кандидатите за евродепутати от листата на ГЕРБ-СДС" . boulevardbulgaria.bg (in Bulgarian) . Retrieved 18 March 2026 . 
 
 ^ "Home | Andrey Kovatchev| MEPs | European Parliament" . www.europarl.europa.eu . Retrieved 12 March 2026 . 
 
 ^ " "The endured european dream of Bulgaria – 1944-1989" " (PDF) . andrey-kovatchev.eu . Retrieved 4 June 2023 . 
 
 ^ "Приети текстове - четвъртък, 7 април 2011 г. - Доклад относно осъществения напредък от страна на бивша югославска република Македония през 2010 г. - P7_TA(2011)0151" . www.europarl.europa.eu . Retrieved 4 March 2020 . 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Andrey Kovatchev . 
 
 Official website 
 
 European Union portal 
 Andrey Kovatchev navigational boxes 
 v t e Current members of the European Parliament from Bulgaria (2019–2024) 
 Ademov &#160;(EPP) 
 Dzhambazki &#160;(ECR) 
 Glavak &#160;(EPP) 
 Hristov &#160;(S&amp;D) 
 Ilčić &#160;(ECR) 
 Jerković &#160;(S&amp;D) 
 Kanev &#160;(EPP) 
 Kovatchev &#160;(EPP) 
 Kyuchyuk &#160;(Renew) 
 Maydell &#160;(EPP) 
 Novakov &#160;(EPP) 
 Penkova &#160;(S&amp;D) 
 Radev &#160;(EPP) 
 Slabakov &#160;(ECR) 
 Stanishev &#160;(S&amp;D) 
 Vitanov &#160;(S&amp;D) 
 Yoncheva &#160;(S&amp;D) 
 Yordanov &#160;(EPP) 
 
 v t e List of members of the European People's Party group (2019–2024) Austria 
 Bernhuber 
 Karas 
 Mandl 
 Sagartz 
 Pirchner 
 Thaler 
 Winzig 
 Belgium 
 Arimont 
 Franssen 
 Lutgen 
 Vandenkendelaere 
 Bulgaria 
 Ademov 
 Kanev 
 Kovatchev 
 Maydell 
 Novakov 
 Radev 
 Yordanov 
 Croatia 
 Glavak 
 Ressler 
 Sokol 
 Zovko 
 Cyprus 
 Fourlas 
 Stavrou 
 Czech Republic 
 Niedermayer 
 Polčák 
 Pospíšil 
 Šojdrová 
 Zdechovský 
 Denmark 
 Weiss 
 Estonia 
 Terras 
 Finland 
 Korhola 
 Pietikäinen 
 Virkkunen 
 France 
 Bellamy 
 Colin-Oesterlé 
 Danjean 
 Didier 
 Hortefeux 
 Morano 
 Sailliet 
 Sander 
 Germany 
 Bentele 
 Berger 
 Braunsberger-Reinhold 
 Caspary 
 Doleschal 
 Düpont 
 Ehler 
 Ferber 
 Gahler 
 Gieseke 
 Herbst 
 Hohlmeier 
 Jahr 
 Liese 
 Lins 
 McAllister 
 Mortler 
 Niebler 
 Pieper 
 Radtke 
 Schneider 
 Schwab 
 Seekatz 
 Simon 
 Verheyen 
 Voss 
 Walsmann 
 Weber 
 Wieland 
 Greece 
 Asimakopoulou 
 Kefalogiannis 
 Kympouropoulos 
 Meimarakis 
 Spyraki 
 Vozemberg 
 Zagorakis 
 Hungary 
 Bocskor 
 Deli 
 Deutsch 
 Gál 
 Győri 
 Gyürk 
 Hidvéghi 
 Hölvényi 
 Járóka 
 Kósa 
 Schaller-Baross 
 Tóth 
 Trócsányi 
 Ireland 
 Clune 
 Fitzgerald 
 Kelly 
 Markey 
 Walsh 
 Italy 
 Comi 
 Dorfmann 
 Martusciello 
 Meo 
 Mussolini 
 Patriciello 
 Peppucci 
 Regimenti 
 Salini 
 Vuolo 
 Zambelli 
 Latvia 
 Kalniete 
 Pūpols 
 Vaidere 
 Lithuania 
 Juknevičienė 
 Kubilius 
 Maldeikienė 
 Mažylis 
 Luxembourg 
 Kemp 
 Wiseler-Santos 
 Malta 
 Casa 
 Metsola 
 Netherlands 
 Berendsen 
 Dalen 
 Haga 
 Lenaers 
 Manders 
 Ormel 
 Schreijer-Pierik 
 Poland 
 Adamowicz 
 Brejza 
 Buzek 
 Duda 
 Frankowski 
 Halicki 
 Karpiński 
 Hübner 
 Jarubas 
 Kalinowski 
 Kopacz 
 Lewandowski 
 Łukacijewska 
 Ochojska 
 Olbrycht 
 Pahl 
 Thun 
 Portugal 
 Becker-Weinberg 
 Coelho 
 dos Santos 
 Morgado 
 Neto 
 Pereira 
 Santos 
 Romania 
 Băsescu 
 Blaga 
 Bogdan 
 Buda 
 Bușoi 
 Falcă 
 Hava 
 Marinescu 
 Motreanu 
 Mureșan 
 Nistor 
 Tomac 
 Vincze 
 Winkler 
 Slovakia 
 Bilčík 
 Lexmann 
 Pollák 
 Štefanec 
 Slovenia 
 Bogovič 
 Novak 
 Tomc 
 Zver 
 Spain 
 Benjumea 
 Castillo 
 Collado 
 Echeverría 
 Estaràs 
 García-Margallo 
 Gil 
 López-Istúriz 
 Mato 
 Millán 
 Montserrat 
 Zarzalejos 
 Zoido 
 Sweden 
 Kokalari 
 Lega 
 Polfjärd 
 Skyttedal 
 Tobé 
 Warborn 
 
 Authority control databases : People MEP directory