French politician and was Member of the European Parliament (born 1960) 
 You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in French . &#32; (December 2008) Click [show] for important translation instructions. 
 View a machine-translated version of the French article. 
 Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must follow the LLM translation guideline , revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia. 
 Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article. 
 You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing French Wikipedia article at [[:fr:Gérard Onesta]]; see its history for attribution. 
 You may also add the template {{Translated|fr|Gérard Onesta}} to the talk page . 
 For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation . 

 Gérard Onesta (born 5 August 1960) is a French politician and was Member of the European Parliament for the South West of France.
 He is a member of Europe Écologie–The Greens , part of the European Greens . On 20 July 2004 he was re-elected a Member of the European Parliament , and he was elected four times one of its Vice-Presidents . His successor is José Bové .
 In March 2010 regional election, he is the leader of Europe Écologie–The Greens in Midi-Pyrénées.
 Onesta defines himself as a European federalist , with strong proclivities for regionalism.
 
 Trivia [ edit ] 
 His cousin Claude Onesta is the former coach of the 5 fold world champion France men's national handball team .
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 
 
 
 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Gérard Onesta . 
 
 Gérard Onesta official website 
 European Parliament: Gérard Onesta 
 Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National France BnF data People MEP directory Other IdRef 
 

 
 This article about a Member of the European Parliament from France is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by adding missing information . v t e