Danish priest and former politician 
 You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Danish . &#32; (October 2015) Click [show] for important translation instructions. 
 
 Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must follow the LLM translation guideline , revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia. 
 Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article. 
 You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Danish Wikipedia article at [[:da:Hanne Dahl]]; see its history for attribution. 
 You may also add the template {{Translated|da|Hanne Dahl}} to the talk page . 
 For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation . 

 Hanne Dahl (born 30 August 1970) is a Danish priest and former politician from Aalborg . She was a member of the European Parliament , representing the June Movement ( Danish : Junibevægelsen ) 2008–2009. &#91; 1 &#93; 
 
 
 Biography [ edit ] 
 This section of a biography of a living person does not include any references or sources . Please help by adding reliable sources . Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately , especially if potentially libelous or harmful. ( March 2026 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) 
 Dahl grew up partly in Malaysia, Indonesia and Singapore, where she attended international American schools, graduated from Aarhus Cathedral School in 1990 and studied theology at Aarhus University from 1991. She worked as a project worker 1999-2002, free church pastor in Himmerland 1998-2005, project manager 2002-2004, political assistant in the EU Parliament 2004-2008. She was also a regular commentator on Weekendavisen 2000-2002 and a member of the board of the Free Teachers' College in Ollerup 2002-2004.
 In 2009, she was appointed acting parish priest in Hasseris parish near Aalborg. The following year she became pastor of Morsø Free Church in Øster Jølby . &#160;Since 2014, she has been a student chaplain at Aalborg Budolfi Deanery.
 
 Policy [ edit ] 
 This section of a biography of a living person does not include any references or sources . Please help by adding reliable sources . Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately , especially if potentially libelous or harmful. ( March 2026 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) 
 Hanne Dahl has been a member of the Social Liberal Party. She was a parliamentary candidate for Democratic Renewal in 1998, a candidate for the European Parliament for the June Movement in 1999, since 2000 a member of the June Movement's national executive committee, political committee and spokesperson for the movement, and chairman of the June Movement's leadership from 2005.
 In the 2004 European elections, she became a first deputy member of parliament. She replaced Jens-Peter Bonde as a member of parliament when he resigned in 2008.
 In the European Parliament, she was until June 2009 co-chair of the Independence/Democracy Group (IND/DEM), vice-chair of the delegation for relations with Switzerland, Iceland and Norway and the EEA Joint Parliamentary Committee, member of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, deputy member of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety, the Committee on Budgetary Control and the Committee on the Internal Market and consumer protection. She was also chairman of the European cooperation party EUDomocraterne. At the time, she was the only Dane in the Conference of Presidents of the European Parliament, which determines the procedure in the parliament.
 For a short period in 1986, Hanne Dahl was head of the secretariat for the National Organisation of Primary and Lower Secondary School Pupils
 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^ "MEP profile: Hanne Dahl" . European Parliament. Archived from the original on 8 June 2009 . Retrieved 2 May 2009 . 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 Presentation at the European Parliament Archived 2009-06-08 at the Wayback Machine 
 Authority control databases : People MEP directory 
 This article about a Member of the European Parliament from Denmark is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by adding missing information . v t e