Magnus Brunner (German: [ˈmaɡnʊs ˈbʁʊnɐ]; born 6 May 1972) is an Austrian politician of the Austrian People's Party (ÖVP) who has been serving as European Commissioner for Internal Affairs and Migration since December 2024. Previously, he served as Austria's finance minister from 2021 until 2024 in the government of Chancellor Karl Nehammer.


Early life and education
Brunner studied jurisprudence at the University of Innsbruck, the University of Vienna (Dr. iur.) and King's College London (LLM).


Political career
Brunner was a member of the Federal Council for the Austrian People's Party (ÖVP) from 1 May 2009 until 6 January 2020.
He served as state secretary (Staatssekretär) in the Ministry of Climate Action, Environment, Energy, Mobility, Innovation, and Technology in the government of Chancellor Sebastian Kurz.
Following the 2024 European elections, the Austrian government nominated Brunner as the country's European Commissioner serving under President Ursula von der Leyen. Journalists made Magnus Brunner in part responsible for the handling of Austria's desolate finances and concluded that he was the wrong choice for the position as European Commissioner.
In July 2025, Brunner was among several European officials declared "persona non grata" by the Government of National Stability in eastern Libya after he and the said officials held an earlier meeting with officials of the rival Government of National Unity based in Tripoli.


Other activities


European Union organizations
European Investment Bank (EIB), Ex-Officio Member of the Board of Governors (since 2021)
European Stability Mechanism (ESM), Member of the Board of Governors (since 2021)


International organizations
Asian Development Bank (ADB), Ex-Officio Member of the Board of Governors (since 2021)
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), Ex-Officio Member of the Board of Governors (since 2021)
Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), Ex-Officio Member of the Board of Governors (since 2021)
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), World Bank Group, Ex-Officio Member of the Board of Governors (since 2021)
World Bank, Ex-Officio Member of the Board of Governors (since 2021)


Non-profit organizations
National Fund of the Republic of Austria for Victims of National Socialism, Member of the Board of Trustees (since 2021)


Honours

 Liechtenstein: Grand Cross of the Order of Merit of the Principality of Liechtenstein (2024)


References