This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification . Please help by adding reliable sources . Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .
 Find sources: &#160; "Manuel António dos Santos" &#160;–&#160; news &#160; · newspapers &#160; · books &#160; · scholar &#160; · JSTOR ( March 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) 
 You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Portuguese . &#32; (March 2026) Click [show] for important translation instructions. 
 
 Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must follow the LLM translation guideline , revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia. 
 Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article. 
 You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Portuguese Wikipedia article at [[:pt:Manuel dos Santos (político)]]; see its history for attribution. 
 You may also add the template {{Translated|pt|Manuel dos Santos (político)}} to the talk page . 
 For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation . 
 Portuguese politician 
 dos Santos in 1999 
 Manuel António dos Santos (born 5 December 1943 in Mirandela ) is a Portuguese politician who served as Member of the European Parliament for the Socialist Party , part of the Party of European Socialists , from 2001 until 2019. &#91; 1 &#93; 
 
 References [ edit ] 
 
 
 ^ "Your MEPs&#160;: Manuel António dos SANTOS" . Europa . European Parliament . Retrieved 5 March 2011 . 
 
 
 External links [ edit ] 
 Personal profile of Manuel António dos Santos in the European Parliament 's database of members 
 

 
 This article about a Member of the European Parliament from Portugal is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by adding missing information . v t e 
 Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Portugal People MEP directory 
 v t e Current nationwide political officials of Portugal M.E.P.s 
 Marta Temido 
 Francisco Assis 
 Ana Catarina Mendes 
 Bruno Gonçalves 
 André Rodrigues 
 Carla Tavares 
 Isilda Gomes 
 Sérgio Gonçalves 
 Sebastião Bugalho 
 Paulo Cunha 
 Ana Miguel Pedro 
 Hélder Sousa Silva 
 Lídia Pereira 
 Sérgio Humberto 
 Paulo Nascimento Cabral 
 António Tânger Corrêa 
 Tiago Moreira de Sá 
 João Cotrim de Figueiredo 
 Catarina Martins 
 João Oliveira 
 National government 
 António José Seguro , President 
 Luís Montenegro , Prime Minister 
 Paulo Rangel , Foreign Affairs Minister 
 Joaquim Miranda Sarmento , Finance Minister 
 António Leitão Amaro , Presidency Minister 
 Manuel Castro Almeida , Economy and Territorial Cohesion Minister 
 Gonçalo Matias , State Reform Minister 
 Carlos Abreu Amorim , Parliamentary Affairs Minister 
 Nuno Melo , National Defense Minister 
 Miguel Pinto Luz , Infrastructure and Housing Minister 
 Rita Júdice , Justice Minister 
 Luís Neves , Internal Administration Minister 
 Fernando Alexandre , Education and Science Minister 
 Ana Paula Martins , Health Minister 
 Maria do Rosário Palma Ramalho , Labour, Solidarity, and Social Security Minister 
 Graça Carvalho , Environment and Energy Minister 
 Margarida Balseiro Lopes , Culture, Youth and Sports Minister 
 José Manuel Fernandes , Agriculture and Sea Minister 
 Assembly of the Republic 
 José Pedro Aguiar-Branco , President 
 Teresa Morais , Vice-President 
 Diogo Pacheco de Amorim , Vice-President 
 Marcos Perestrello , Vice-President 
 Rodrigo Saraiva , Vice-President