Marianne Leonie Petrus Thyssen (Dutch pronunciation: [maːriˈjɑnə ˈtɛisə(n)]; born 24 July 1956) is a Belgian politician of the Christian Democratic and Flemish Party (CD&V) who served as European Commissioner for Employment, Social Affairs, Skills and Labour Mobility between 2014 and 2019.


Early life
Born in Sint-Gillis-Waas, to a Flemish family, not related to the family of Baron Thyssen, Thyssen graduated from the Catholic University of Leuven (KUL) in 1979, where she obtained a degree in law. She worked as a legal adviser for a Belgian organisation for the self-employed and small and medium-sized businesses UNIZO and the women's network Christelijke Middenstands- en Burgervrouwen (CMBV) now Markant, becoming Director then acting Secretary-General at UNIZO in 1991. From 1986-1988 she acted as legal adviser to the state secretary for public health and disability policy.


Political activity
In 1991, Thyssen became a Member of the European Parliament (MEP) for Flanders with the CD&V, the Flemish Christian Democrats in Belgium; she took the place of Karel Pinxten, who had moved to the Belgian Senate. From 1995-2008 she served as municipal Councillor for Oud-Heverlee, a municipality located in the Belgian province of Flemish Brabant, and in 2001 she became First Alderman for Oud-Heverlee. As a local councillor, she chose to work on such social issues as childcare and care for the elderly. In 2008 Thyssen was elected leader of CD&V party.
During her almost 23 years as a member of the European Parliament Thyssen was re-elected five times. She has sat on the European Parliament's Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection, has substituted for the Committee on International Trade, was a member of the Delegation to the EU-Ukraine Parliamentary Cooperation Committee and a substitute for the Delegation to the EU-Turkey Joint Parliamentary Committee. From 1999-2014 she served as leader of the European People's Party's (EPP) Belgian delegation and from 2004-2009 was elected first vice-president of the EPP.
In 2014 Thyssen was appointed to the European Commission as Commissioner in charge of Employment, Social Affairs, Skills and Labour Mobility for the European Union (EU). She became the first Belgian woman to be appointed Commissioner.


Early career
1979: Degree in law at the Catholic University of Leuven (KUL)
Assistant in the faculty of law, Catholic University of Leuven
Legal assistant in the office of the State Secretary for Health
Successively legal adviser, head of a research department and acting Secretary-General at Unizo (organisation for the self-employed and small and medium-sized businesses)


Career
since 1991: Member of the European Parliament
Member of the bureau of the European People's Party
Vice-Chairwoman of the EPP-ED Group's SME Circle
First Deputy Mayor of Oud-Heverlee until 2008
Chair woman of the CD&V (15 May 2008 – 23 June 2010)


See also
2004 European Parliament election in Belgium


References


External links
 Media related to Marianne Thyssen at Wikimedia Commons

Personal Website
Personal profile of Marianne Thyssen in the European Parliament's database of members
Declaration (PDF) of financial interests (in Dutch)