Name: Damjan Kukovec
Position: 

Judge

Biography and career

Born in 1977 in Ljubljana, Slovenia, Mr Damjan Kukovec obtained a law degree at the Faculty of Law of the Univerza v Ljubljani (University of Ljubljana, Slovenia) in 2001 and a master’s degree in law at Harvard Law School (United States) in 2002. He studied for a doctorate at that university, and defended his thesis there in 2015.

In 2002, he began his professional career as a judicial trainee at the Višje sodišče v Ljubljani (Court of Appeal, Ljubljana, Slovenia) and held that position until 2004. During 2004, he was a lawyer at the Special Court for Sierra Leone (Freetown, Sierra Leone) and at the Ustavno sodišče (Constitutional Court, Slovenia).

In 2005, Mr Kukovec joined the Court of Justice of the European Union as a lawyer before joining the Legal Service of the European Commission from 2006 to 2018. In 2006, he passed the Slovenian state bar exam.

At the same time, Mr Kukovec dedicated himself to an academic career, mostly in the field of EU law. Between 2011 and 2013, he taught global law at Harvard Law School and at its Institute for Global Law and Policy. He subsequently taught at several universities of law worldwide, including the FGV Direito Rio, Rio de Janeiro (Law Faculty of the Getulio Vargas Foundation, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil) in 2014, the University of Kent’s Brussels School of International Studies (Belgium) in 2016, the European University Institute of Florence (EUI, Italy) in 2016 and 2017, and the Univerza v Ljubljani between 2018 and 2020. From 2018, Mr Kukovec was also a senior lecturer in law and Associate Director of the PhD programme at Middlesex University in London (United Kingdom).

Mr Kukovec is an honorary professor at the Faculty of Law of University College London (United Kingdom) and at City Law School, University of London (United Kingdom), as well as an affiliated fellow at Harvard University, and is currently a visiting professor at the Rijksuniversiteit Groningen (University of Groningen, Netherlands).

Mr Kukovec is the author of numerous publications in EU law. He is a regular guest lecturer at universities worldwide.

Mr Kukovec was appointed as a Judge at the General Court on 13 January 2022.

Memberships of legal, cultural, artistic, social, sporting or charitable foundations, organisations or establishments

Member of RECONNECT

Member of the British International Studies Association

Member of the Society of Legal Scholars

Member of the Pravniško društvo Ljubljana

Member of the European Society of International Law

Member of the Klub alumnov Pravne fakultete Univerze v Ljubljani

Member of the Slovensko društvo za evropsko pravo (Slovenian Association for European Law)

Member of the European Union Studies Association

Member of the editorial committee of the Cahiers de droit européen

Member of the editorial committee of the Ljubljana Law Review

Founding member of the Association of European Competition Law Judges (AECLJ)

Mentor for the American Slovenian Education Foundation (ASEF)

Member of the Academic Society for Competition Law (ASCOLA)

Founding member of the Forum européen du droit de la concurrence

Honorary titles and awards

Award for the best thesis in EU law, awarded by the Government of the Republic of Slovenia (2001)

Gold Medal for Academic Achievement, awarded by the Univerza v Ljubljani (2001)

Landon Gammon Prize, awarded by Harvard Law School (2001)

Rotary fellowship, awarded by Rotary Club Ljubljana (2008)

Academic fellowships, awarded by Harvard Law School (2009-2012)

Senior Fellow of the Higher Education Academy (2020)