Name: Francesco Bestagno
Position: 

Judge

Biography and career

Born in 1966 in Genoa (Italy), Mr Francesco Bestagno obtained a degree in law in 1989 from the Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore (Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Milan, Italy) and a doctorate in international economic law in 1995 from the Università Commerciale Bocconi (Bocconi University, Milan, in partnership with the Universities of Turin and Bergamo, Italy). In 1997, he carried out postdoctoral study at the University of Geneva (Switzerland).

Mr Bestagno began his academic career as a researcher in international law in 1997 at the Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, where he taught international law and EU law from 2000 to 2002. He became an associate lecturer in these disciplines in 2002. Appointed full professor of EU law at that university’s Faculty of Law in 2006, he held this position until 2020, while also serving as director of the Institute of International Studies between 2016 and 2020. He is currently a member of the faculty committee of the Doctoral School of Law at the same university.

In parallel with his academic activities, and after being admitted to the Bar of Brescia (Italy) in 1992, Mr Bestagno worked as an independent legal adviser on issues relating to EU law, fundamental rights, customs law and international trade law until 2020. He participated as a legal expert on behalf of the Vatican (The Holy See) in diplomatic conferences within the Council of Europe in 2017 and 2019.

From 2020 to 2025, he was Senior Legal Adviser and Head of the Legal Service of the Permanent Representation of Italy to the European Union in Brussels (Belgium), where, between 2021 and 2022, he was also responsible for the section dealing with infringement proceedings.

Mr Bestagno is the author of numerous publications in the fields of EU law, fundamental rights and international trade law, including two university textbooks on the institutions and sources of EU law and on the European internal market.

Mr Bestagno has been a judge at the General Court since 15 September 2025.

 

Memberships of legal, cultural, artistic, social, sporting or charitable foundations, organisations or establishments

 Member of the Associazione italiana degli studiosi di Diritto dell’Unione europea (AISDUE)

 Member of the management board of the Centro Studi sul Federalismo (CSF)

 Member of the editorial or scientific committees of the following legal journals: ‘Diritto del commercio internazionale’, ‘Diritto Pubblico Comparato ed Europeo’, ‘Eurojus.it’, ‘European Legal Forum’, ‘Jus – Rivista di scienze giuridiche’, ‘Papers di diritto europeo’, ‘Rivista del contenzioso europeo’ and ‘Unione europea e diritti’

 Co-founder and coordinator of the editorial collection ‘Studi di Diritto internazionale e dell’Unione europea’