Name: Gabriele Steinfatt
Position: 

Judge

Biography and career

Born in 1977 in Bad Harzburg (Germany), Ms Gabriele Steinfatt studied law at the Universität des Saarlandes (Saarland University) in Saarbrücken (Germany) and in Strasbourg (France). She obtained a master's degree in private law and a certificate in European law from the université Robert Schuman (University Robert Schuman, Strasbourg, France) in 2000. In 2002, she passed the First State Law Examination in Saarbrücken. From 2002 to 2003, she followed postgraduate studies in law at the Europa-Institut of the Universität des Saarlandes (Institute of European Studies of Saarland University, Germany). In 2005, she completed her legal internship in Saarbrücken (Germany) with the Second State Law Examination. She wrote a thesis at the Universität des Saarlandes and was awarded the title of Doctor of Laws in 2012.

In 2005, Ms Steinfatt was appointed as a judge at the Verwaltungsgericht der Freien Hansestadt Bremen (Administrative Court, Bremen, Germany), where she served until 2017, before joining the Oberverwaltungsgericht der Freien Hansestadt Bremen (Higher Administrative Court, Bremen, Germany) from 2017 to 2019. During that period, she was also appointed as a member of the Dienstgerichtshof für Richter (Disciplinary Appeals Court for Judges) and an alternate member of the Berufsgerichtshofs für Ingenieure (Disciplinary Appeals Court for Engineers).

An author of several publications, particularly in the field of European law, Ms Steinfatt has also been involved in teaching as a lecturer at the Universität des Saarlandes and the Universität Bremen (University of Bremen, Germany). She provided training for young lawyers as part of their legal internships and was an examiner for the First State Law Examination.

Ms Steinfatt was appointed as a Judge at the General Court on 26 September 2019.

Memberships of legal, cultural, artistic, social, sporting or charitable foundations, organisations or establishments

Member of the Vereinigung der Bremischen Verwaltungsrichterinnen und Verwaltungsrichter