Name: Hervé Cassagnabère
Position: 

Judge

Biography and career

Born in 1976 in Bayonne (France), Hervé Cassagnabère graduated from the Institut d’études politiques (IEP) de Bordeaux (Institute for Political Studies – Sciences Po Bordeaux, France) in 1997, from the École des Hautes Études Commerciales (HEC Paris) (Paris Business School, France) in 1999 and from the École Nationale d’Administration (ENA, Paris et Strasbourg) (National School of Administration, Paris and Strasbourg, France) in 2004.

A member of the Conseil d’État (Council of State, France), he began his career there in 2004 as a Judge-Rapporteur of the Fourth Chamber of the Litigation Division, specialising in civil service matters.

From 2008 to 2010, Mr Cassagnabère was seconded by the Conseil d’État to work as an adviser in the French Prime Minister’s office where he was in charge of cultural affairs. In 2010, by decree of the Minister for Culture, he was appointed as the Managing Director of the national public administrative establishment ‘Musée national Picasso – Paris’.

At the end of 2012, after serving as Judge-Rapporteur at the Conseil d’État, Mr Cassagnabère was seconded to the Court of Justice of the European Union as a legal secretary for a period of eight years.

In 2020, he returned to the Conseil d’État as Deputy President of the Chamber specialising in tax and publicly-owned property litigation. He is also a member of the Home Affairs Section of the Conseil d’État, which is responsible for issuing legal opinions on draft laws and regulations on behalf of the Ministries of the Interior, Justice, and Culture.

Mr Cassagnabère has also acted as rapporteur for the commission d’accès aux documents administratifs (CADA) (Commission on access to administrative documents, France), rapporteur for the Conseil supérieur de la propriété littéraire et artistique (High Council for Literary and Artistic Property, France) reporting to the French Minister for Culture, legal adviser to the ‘Forum des droits sur internet’ association, and local deputy councillor for the municipality of Biarritz (France).

In addition to his judicial and administrative career, Mr Cassagnabère was a lecturer in public law at the Instituts d’études politiques in Bordeaux and Paris (France), taught at the École de formation du Barreau de Paris (Paris Bar School, France), and lectured at the Academy of European Law in Trier (ERA) (Germany) and at the Institut de formation et de recherche des avocats aux conseils (IFRAC) (France). He also contributes to the ongoing education of members of the Conseil d’État in EU law.

He is the author of numerous publications and works on EU law.

Mr Cassagnabère was appointed as a Judge at the General Court of the European Union on 7 October 2024.

Membership of legal, cultural, artistic, social, sports or charitable foundations, organisations or establishments

Vice-President of the non-profit association under Luxembourg law ‘Sequenda’, dedicated to the advancement of opera

Member of the Association des membres et anciens membres du Conseil d’État

Honorary titles and awards

Médaille de la Défense Nationale (2001)