Name: Juliane Kokott
Position: 

Advocate General

Biography and career

Born in 1957 in Frankfurt am Main (Germany), Ms Juliane Kokott studied law at the Universität Bonn (University of Bonn, Germany) and at the University of Geneva (Switzerland) from 1976 to 1982. She was awarded a Fulbright scholarship and went on to complete an L.L.M at the American University, Washington DC (United States) in 1983. On her return to Europe she obtained a doctorate in law from the Universität Heidelberg (University of Heidelberg, Germany) in 1985, then from Harvard University (United States) in 1990. In addition, in 1985, she was awarded a diploma from the Académie Internationale de Droit Constitutionnel which is based in Tunis.

Ms Kokott began her academic career in 1991 as Visiting Professor at the University of California, Berkeley (United States). She then pursued her academic career in Germany, where she was a Professor of German and Foreign Public Law, International Law and European Law at the Universität Augsburg (University of Augsburg) in 1992, at the University of Heidelberg in 1993 and at the Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf (University Heinrich Heine, Düsseldorf) from 1994 to 1999. In 1999, she was awarded a professorship at the Universität St. Gallen (University of Saint Gallen, Switzerland), where she taught courses in international law, international business law and European law. In 2000, she was appointed as Director of the Institute for European and International Business Law at the University of St. Gallen and, from 2001 to 2003, Deputy Director of the Master of Business Law programme at the same university.

She then worked for the German government, which, in 1995, appointed her as an alternate judge to the international Court of Conciliation and Arbitration of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). Until 2003, she was Deputy Chairwoman of the Wissenschaftliche Beirat ‘Globale Umweltveränderungen’ der Bundesregierung (WBGU) (Federal Government Advisory Council on Global Environmental Change, Germany).

Ms Kokott was appointed as an Advocate General at the Court of Justice on 7 October 2003. She has served as first Advocate General from 2006 to 2007.

Memberships of legal, cultural, artistic, social, sporting or charitable foundations, organisations or establishments

Founder and Chair (with Professor Pasquale Pistone, IBDF) of the International Law Association Committee (ILA) on International Tax Law (Part 1: Taxpayer’s Rights; Part 2: Nexus and International Taxation; Part 3: Implementation of International Tax Law)

Member of the advisory boards of the Deutsche Steuerjuristische Gesellschaft (German Tax Law Society), the Berliner Steuergespräche (Berlin Tax Talks) and of the Steuerrechtswissenschaftliche Vereinigung (Tax Law Association, Heidelberg) (Founding member)

Member of the steering committee of the Master programme of the Faculty of Law of the University of Luxembourg

Participation in the mentoring programme ‘Geh deinen Weg’ of the Deutschland Stiftung Integration and in the Minerva-Femmenet programme (mentoring programme of the Max Planck Society for young women scientists)

President of the Board of Directors of the Max Planck Institute for Tax Law and Public Finance

‘Saarland Ambassador‘

Honorary titles and awards

Doctor honoris causa in law, Dr. iur. h.c., Universität Augsburg (2022)

Doctor honoris causa, University of Liège (2022)

Dr. Otto Schmidt-Preis zur Förderung der Europäisierung und Internationalisierung des Rechts (2020)

Otto Hahn Medal awarded by the Max Planck Society