Name: Mariyana Kancheva
Position: 

Judge

Biography and career

Ms Mariyana Kancheva was born in 1958 in Tryavna (Bulgaria); she holds a master’s degree in law obtained in 1984 and awarded by the Sofiyski universitet ‘Sveti Kliment Ohridski’ (University of Sophia ‘Saint Clement of Ohrid’, Bulgaria). She also holds an additional master’s degree in European law obtained in 2009 and awarded by the Institute for European Studies at the Université libre de Bruxelles (Free University of Brussels, Belgium).

She began her career as a trainee judge from 1985 to 1986 at the Sofiyski Okrazhen Sad (Regional Court, Sofia, Bulgaria). She worked as a legal adviser from 1986 to 1988 and then as a lawyer at the Sofia Bar (Bulgaria) until 2011 and in Brussels (Belgium) from 2007 to 2011. Between 1992 and 1994, Ms Kancheva held the position of Director-General of the Services Office for the Diplomatic Corps at the Bulgarian Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Throughout her career, she also specialised in several fields including intellectual property law (registered as an intellectual property representative with the Patentno Vedomstvo na Republika Bŭlgariya (Patent Office of the Republic of Bulgaria)) and economic law (registered as a representative for bankruptcy and insolvency proceedings with the Ministry of Justice of the Republic of Bulgaria).

In addition, she is an arbitrator for the resolution of commercial disputes in Bulgaria. As a legal adviser to the Bulgarian Parliament, she participates in drafting various legislative texts. She is the author of several publications and books in the field of European law. Moreover, Ms Kancheva has participated in many national and international seminars, fora and conferences.

Ms Kancheva was appointed as a Judge at the General Court on 19 September 2011.

Membership of legal, cultural, artistic, social, sports or charitable foundations, organisations or establishments

Member of the European Women Lawyers Association (EWLA)

Member of the ‘Femmes d’Europe’ Association

Honorary member of the Women Lawyers Association – Bulgaria (Asoziaziya na zhenite advokati)

Member of the Academy of European Law (ERA)

Founding member of the Association of European Competition Law Judges (AECLJ A.S.B.L.)

Titles and awards

‘Silver Plaque’, an award representing the highest distinction of the Bar of the Republic of Bulgaria, awarded by the Sofia Bar Council (2014)

National Justice Prize ‘Thémis’, award given in the category ‘Justice without Borders’ (2017)

15-year Jubilee Medal from the Fondatsia ‘Tsentar za obuchenie na advokati Krastyu Tsontchev’ (‘Krastyu Tsontchev Lawyer Training Centre’ Foundation) recognising her ‘remarkable contribution as a Lecturer to improving the qualifications of Bulgarian lawyers’ (2020)

National Justice Prize ‘Thémis’, special award given in the category ‘Euro-integration and cooperation’ (2020)

National Justice Prize ‘Thémis’, awarded by the Bulgarian National Radio (BNR), for her work as author and presenter of the segment ‘The jurisprudence of the CJEU’, broadcast once a month as part of the legal programme ‘The law and Thémis’ from the BNR, ‘a very successful segment aimed at keeping the Bulgarian legal community informed and promoting the work of the EU’s judicial body’ (2024)