Name: Maria Lourdes Arastey Sahún
Position: 

President of the Fifth Chamber

Biography and career

Born in 1959 in Tarragona (Spain), Ms Maria Lourdes Arastey Sahún studied at the Universitat de Barcelona (University of Barcelona, Spain), where she obtained a law degree in 1983, before taking professional judicial training at the Escuela Judicial (Judicial College, Spain) from 1984 to 1985.

She was appointed as a district judge at the Juzgado de Distrito de Sant Feliu de Llobregat (District Court of Sant Feliu de Llobregat, Spain) and the Juzgado de Distrito de Barcelona (District Court of Barcelona, Spain) from 1985 to 1989. In 1989, she was assigned to the Juzgado de lo Social No 7 de Barcelona (Social Court No 7 of Barcelona, Spain) for one year. She then joined the Social Division of the Tribunal Superior de Justicia de Cataluña (High Court of Justice of Catalonia, Spain) where she remained until 2009. She was appointed to the Tribunal Supremo (Supreme Court, Spain) as a judge in 2009. From 2013 to 2021, she was also a judge at the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Administrative Tribunal (Brussels, Belgium).

In addition to her judicial career, Ms Arastey Sahún was also involved in teaching. From 1998 to 2008, she was an associate professor in Employment and Social Security Law at the Universitat de Barcelona. She was also a lecturer at national judicial schools, in particular in Spain (on a regular basis), Bulgaria (2008) and Romania (2008), and at the Juan Carlos I School for Centroamerica and the Caribbean (2006). Ms Arastey Sahún gave lectures and participated in seminars at numerous universities. She was also a member of several bodies operating, inter alia, in the fields of EU law, training and examination of the competence of judges, and alternative dispute resolution.

Ms Arastey Sahún was appointed as a Judge at the Court of Justice on 7 October 2021, where she has held office as President of Chamber since 8 October 2024.

Memberships of legal, cultural, artistic, social, sporting or charitable foundations, organisations or establishments

Member of the Advisory Board of the Derecho Social y Empresa

Member of the Advisory Board of the Franco-Spanish Friendship Association ‘MUJERES AVENIR’

Member of the Asociación Española de Salud y Seguridad Social (AESSS)

Member of the Board of Directors of the Asociación Española para el Estudio del Derecho Europeo (AEDEUR)

Member of the European Association of Judges for Mediation (GEMME), former President of its Spanish Section, and former Vice-President of its European Executive Committee

Member of the European Law Institute (ELI), joining scientific committees at annual meetings on European case-law organised by its ‘Spanish Hub’ (2018, 2019, 2020 and 2021)

Member of the Scientific Board of the Femeris Journal of Gender Studies (Universidad Carlos III de Madrid)

Member of the Women in a Legal World association

Member of the editorial board of the Revista Foro de Seguridad Social