Name: Massimo Condinanzi
Position: 

President of the Ninth Chamber

Biography and career

Born in 1964 in Biella (Italy), Mr Massimo Condinanzi obtained his undergraduate law degree in 1988 from the Università degli Studi di Genova (University of Genoa, Italy). In 1993, he obtained a doctorate in European Communities law from the Università degli Studi di Bologna (University of Bologna, Italy).

Mr Condinanzi began his academic career in 1990 as an assistant for teaching and scientific activities at the institute of international law for the law faculty of the Università degli Studi di Milano (University of Milan, Italy); a position he held until 1996. From 1996 to 1998, he held the researcher post in international law within the same faculty.

In 1997, he joined the Court of Justice of the European Communities as a legal secretary, first with Advocate General Giuseppe Tesauro and then with Advocate General Antonio Saggio.

On his return to Italy in 1998, as an associate professor, he taught international law at the Università di Bologna and European Union law at the Piacenza campus of the Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore (Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Italy), at the Università degli Studi di Genova and at the faculty of law of the Università degli Studi di Milano. It was at that faculty that he became a tenured professor of European Union law in 2005, a position he has held ever since as Chair of European Union law and Chair of European Union litigation. Between 2014 and 2018, still at the same faculty, he was the coordinator of the international law and EU law section of the department of Italian public law and supranational law. He was a guest lecturer at the université Paris-Panthéon-Assas (Paris-Panthéon-Assas University, France), université Montesquieu Bordeaux IV (University of Montesquieu Bordeaux IV, France), Universitatea ‘Alexandru Ioan Cuza’ din Iași (Alexandru Ioan Cuza University, Romania) and the université de Genève (University of Geneva, Switzerland). He has been a member and rapporteur of thesis juries, particularly in respect of European Union litigation, at a number of European universities.

He has always been interested in European Union litigation law, and, in 2023, he founded the Review of European litigation. He is the director of this review.

From 2016 to 2018 and from 2019 to 2023, he coordinated the Office for the resolution of infringement proceedings at the Presidency of the Council of Ministers of the Italian Republic.

From 2005 to 2024, he also practised as a lawyer at the Biella and Milan Bars, in which capacity he was involved in numerous cases before the EU courts.

Alongside these activities, he was a member of the Board of the Academy of European Law in Trier (ERA, Germany) as well as a lecturer and an expert instructor at the Scuola Superiore della Magistratura (School for the Judiciary, Italy).

Mr Condinanzi is the author of numerous books and articles, particularly on European Union law, and has taken part, often as organiser, in many national and international legal conferences. In 2017, he helped coordinate the drafting of the first Italian ‘article-by-article’ commentary on the procedural rules of the European Courts. Between 2017 and 2023, he was also coordinator of a research group carrying out a research programme of national interest (PRIN 2017) entitled ‘Dove va l'Europa? (‘Where is Europe going?’)’.

Mr Condinanzi was appointed as a Judge at the Court of Justice from 7 October 2024.

Memberships of legal, cultural, artistic, social, sporting or charitable foundations, organisations or establishments

Founder and director of the Review of European litigation

Member of Società Italiana di Diritto Internazionale e dell’Unione europea (SIDI)

Member of the Association Française d’Études Européennes (AFÉE)

Member of the Associazione Italiana degli Studiosi di Diritto dell'Unione europea (AISDUE)

Member of the Management Board of the legal journal Eurojus

Member of the scientific committee of the Rivista italiana di diritto pubblico comunitario

Honorary titles and awards

Holder of Jean Monnet Chair ad personam ‘Chi ha paura dell’Europa? (Qui a peur de l’Europe?)’, Università degli Studi di Milano (2017-2020)

Holder of Jean Monnet Chair ad personam ‘Espace de liberté, sécurité et justice: protection juridictionnelle et libre circulation des personnes’, Università degli Studi di Milano (2009-2012)