Name: Petra Škvařilová-Pelzl
Position: 

President of the Sixth Chamber

Biography and career

Born in 1975 in Prague (Czechoslovakia), Ms Petra Škvařilová-Pelzl studied law in the Czech Republic and in Germany, at the end of which the Univerzita Karlova (Charles University in Prague, Czech Republic) awarded her the title of Magister iuris (summa cum laude) in 1999. She embarked on studies for a doctorate in law at the Universität Hamburg (University of Hamburg, Germany), where she defended her thesis in 2004 (summa cum laude). She also holds an interpreting qualification for German from the Státní jazyková škola (State Language School of Prague, Czech Republic) in 1995.

Although she began her professional career as a research associate in the Commercial, Maritime, and Business Law Department at the Universität Hamburg in 1999, she successfully passed a competition organised by the European Personnel Selection Office (EPSO) for the purposes of recruiting Czech lawyers by the European institutions. She then joined the Library, Research and Documentation Directorate-General of the Court of Justice of the European Union as an official and worked as a lawyer administrator from 2004 to 2019. Between 2010 and 2016, she held the post of aide to the Directorate-General. From 2017 to 2018, she subsequently served in the capacity of Legal Secretary in the Chambers of Judge Maria Berger at the Court of Justice.

Author of publications, in particular in the areas of EU law and comparative law, Ms Škvařilová-Pelzl has also devoted herself to teaching at the Univerzita Karlova where she also served as member of the selection boards for doctorate examinations in EU law and at the Verwaltungsakademie des Bundes (Federal Academy of Public Administration, Austria) in Vienna. In addition, Ms Škvařilová-Pelzl also speaks at numerous seminars and conferences, including the biennial German-Czech Law Festival.

Ms Škvařilová-Pelzl was appointed as a Judge at the General Court on 26 September 2019, where she has held office as President of Chamber since 10 October 2024.

 

Memberships of legal, cultural, artistic, social, sporting or charitable foundations, organisations or establishments

Member of the Societas Iuris Publici Europaei e.V. (SIPE)

Ambassador for the Czech project #PRVNÍCH100LET (bringing together inspiring contemporary women from the legal world and from public life and recalling the destinies of the women who have shaped their professions)

Recipient of the ‘Copernicus’ scholarship for studies at the Universität Hamburg (1996/1997) and of the Bundestag (German Parliament) scholarship for participation in the International Parliamentary Internship (Berlin, 2004), alumni member of those organisations

Member of the Association of European Competition Law Judges

Honorary titles and awards

Recipient of a prize awarded by the legal journal ‘Zeitschrift für Europäisches Privatrecht’ for the article ‘Das Produkthaftungsrecht in der Tschechischen Republik und nach der Produkthaftungsrichtlinie’ (Freiburg im Breisgau, 1998)