Name: Tamara Ćapeta
Position: 

Advocate General

Biography and career

Born in 1967 in Zagreb (Croatia), Ms Tamara Ćapeta began her studies at the Sveučilište u Zagrebu (University of Zagreb, Croatia), from which she graduated with a diploma in law in 1991. She pursued her studies at the College of Europe in Bruges (Belgium) where she was awarded a Master's degree in Advanced European Studies in 1993. Back at the Sveučilište u Zagrebu, she undertook a PhD and became a doctor of law in 2001.

Ms Ćapeta began her professional career in 1992 as a civil servant within the Croatian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, in the Department for European Integration and the Department for UN Agencies with a seat in Europe. From 1994 to 1997 she conducted research on the European integration process at the Institut za razvoj i međunarodne odnose (Institute for Development and International Relations, Croatia).

She began her academic career in 1997 as a university assistant in the Department of Commercial Law and International Trade at the Faculty of Economics of the Sveučilište u Zagrebu. Since 2002, she has been a professor at the Faculty of Law of the Sveučilište u Zagrebu, where she was one of the founding members of the Department of European Public Law.

In 2013, Ms Ćapeta was appointed Head of the Croatian Language Translation Unit at the Directorate-General for Multilingualism of the Court of Justice of the European Union, resuming her teaching activities at the Sveučilište u Zagrebu in 2014. From 2015 to 2021, she served as Head of the Department of European Public Law and as Director of the Postgraduate Programme in European Law there. In 2018, she founded the Jean Monnet Centre of Excellence, which is dedicated to research on the rule of law, and served as its coordinator from 2018 to 2021.

Ms Ćapeta is the author of numerous publications in the field of EU law. She is the founder of an international journal on EU law, the only one in existence to date in Croatia, and was its editor-in-chief from 2010 to 2015. In parallel with her teaching activities at the Sveučilište u Zagrebu, she was Visiting scholar of EU Law at the Indiana University School of Law Exchange Program (United States) between 2005 and 2010, and then in 2016 at the University of Pittsburgh (United States) and at Zhōngguó Zhèngfǎ Dàxué (China University of Political Science and Law, China). She also teaches Croatian judges and civil servants as part of continuing professional development programmes on EU law organised by the Pravosudna akademija (Judicial Academy, Croatia) and the Državna škola za javnu upravu (State School of Public Administration, Croatia).

In 2020, Ms Ćapeta was appointed by a joint committee of the European Union to serve as a member of the arbitration panel under the UK Withdrawal Agreement, a role she ceased to occupy further to her appointment as Advocate General at the Court of Justice.

Ms Tamara Ćapeta was appointed as Advocate General at the Court of Justice on 7 October 2021.

Memberships of legal, cultural, artistic, social, sporting or charitable foundations, organisations or establishments

Member of the Alumni Association of the College of Europe

Member of the Croatian Alumni Association of the College of Europe

Member of the Croatian Fulbright Alumni Association

Member of the Editorial Board of the Croatian Yearbook of European Law and Policy

Member of the Hrvatske udruge za europsko pravo (CROSEL)

Member of the Hrvatske udruge za studij Europske unije (CEUSA)

Member of the Hrvatski pravni centar (HPC)

Member of the International Federation for European Law (FIDE)

Member of the Scientific Committee of the Collana di Diritto per l'Economia del Dipartimento di Studi economico-aziendali e Diritto per l'Economia, Università degli Studi di Milano-Bicocca

Member of the University Association for Contemporary European Studies (UACES)