Name: Tanja Pavelin
Position: 

Judge

Biography and career

Born in Zagreb (Croatia) in 1973, Ms Tanja Pavelin obtained a law degree in 1996 and a doctorate in 2020 from the Sveučilište u Zagrebu (University of Zagreb, Croatia).

Ms Pavelin began her professional career in 1997 as a legal trainee at the Općinski sud u Zagrebu (Municipal Court, Zagreb, Croatia) and the Županijski sud u Zagrebu (County Court, Zagreb, Croatia). After passing her bar exam in 1998, she became a legal adviser at the Općinski sud u Zagrebu in 1999. Ms Pavelin was appointed judge at the Općinski sud u Zlataru (Municipal Court, Zlatar, Croatia) in 2002, then joined the Općinski kazneni sud u Zagrebu (Municipal Criminal Court, Zagreb, Croatia) as a judge in 2008.

From 2010 to 2011, she worked as a senior legal adviser at the Vrhovni sud Republike Hrvatske (Supreme Court of the Republic of Croatia), while also serving as secretary of the Državno sudbeno vijeće (State Judicial Council, Croatia). Between 2011 and 2021, she served at the Županijski sud u Zagrebu, in the departments responsible for criminal cases and cases related to corruption, organised crime and war crimes. During this period, Ms Pavelin was also President of the department of that court responsible for monitoring the case-law of the Court of Justice of the European Union and the European Court of Human Rights, as well as President of the chamber responsible for judicial cooperation in criminal matters with the Member States of the European Union.

From 2021 to 2025, she served as a judge at the Visoki kazneni sud Republike Hrvatske (Criminal Court of Appeal of the Republic of Croatia). At the same time, Ms Pavelin chaired the Judicial Council of that court, where she also sat on the Expert Committee responsible for the enforcement of judgments and decisions of the European Court of Human Rights, while acting as a point of contact within the European Judicial Network in criminal matters. During the same period, she was also a member of the Judicial Council of the Vrhovni sud Republike Hrvatske.

At the same time, Ms Pavelin was President of the Disciplinary Court of the Chamber of Electrical Engineers from 2015 to 2024 and of the Chamber of Civil Engineers from 2016 to 2024. During the same period, she was also Vice-President of the Disciplinary Court of the Croatian Medical Chamber from 2019 to 2024.

Since 2023, Ms Pavelin has also been a lecturer at Effectus University of Applied Sciences (Croatia) and at the Faculty of Law of the Sveučilište u Zagrebu. She also teaches at the National School for the Judiciary, the Judicial Academy of Croatia and the European Judicial Training Network (EJTN).

Ms Pavelin is the author of numerous publications and books, particularly in the fields of criminal law, criminal procedure, judicial cooperation in criminal matters within the European Union and human rights.

Ms Pavelin has been a Judge at the General Court since 15 September 2025.

 

Memberships of legal, cultural, artistic, social, sporting or charitable foundations, organisations or establishments 
edit

 Member of the editorial board of the legal journal DOOR